Real Ruby and Meta-Programming
==============================

Asterisk, Splat and Hash
------------------------

Collects the remaining arguments into an array.

    def splat(* args)
      p "#{args.length}: #{args}"
    end

    splat 1, 2, 3, 4 # 4: [1, 2, 3, 4]

How else can we pass a variable number of arguments?

    def var(args)
      p "#{args.inspect}"
    end

    var "1" => "2", "3" => "4" # { "1" => "2", "3" => "4" }

Blocks and Yields
-----------------

A parameter preceded with an ampersand takes a `do` block. It is actually a `Proc`.

    def f1(& b)
      puts "#{b.class}"
      yield 
    end

    f1 do
      puts 'hello world' # Proc, hello world
    end

We can take advantage of this to create class variables that can be assigned to, read or used.

    class F

      def thing=(value)
        @thing = value
      end

      def thing(& b)
        if block_given?
          yield @thing
        else
          @thing
        end
      end

    end

    f = F.new
    p f.thing # nil

    f.thing = 42
    p f.thing # 42

    f.thing do |value|
      p value * 2 # 84
    end

The same idea is used in `File` to close the file handle after the do block yields.

    File.open(filename) do |h|
      # read file
    end

    # file handle is closed

Lambda vs. Proc
---------------

Both are anonymous functions that behave in very similar ways.

    f = Proc.new { p @thing }
    f.call # nil

    l = lambda { p @thing }
    l.call # nil

    @thing = 42

    f.call # 42
    l.call # 42

One subtle difference is in how both enforce [*arity*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arity).

    f = Proc.new { |t| p t }
    f.call 1, 2 # 1

    l = lambda { |t| p t }
    l.call 1, 2 # ArgumentError

The other is in how [return is handled](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/626/when-to-use-lambda-when-to-use-proc-new).

Methods and Send
----------------

Ruby methods are messages. The `send` function invokes a method.

    p "hello world".send(:upcase) # "HELLO WORLD"

When you use the & operator you transform the object on the right into a `Proc`. We can now invoke a method on every element of an array.

    class Symbol
      alias_method :old_to_proc, :to_proc
      def to_proc
        puts "to_proc for symbol `#{self}`"
        old_to_proc
      end
    end

    p ["hello", "world"].map(&:upcase) # to_proc for symbol `upcase`, ["HELLO", "WORLD"]

Meta Programming
----------------

Ruby is well known for its *meta-programming* abilities. One of the most interesting features is `method_missing`, a chance to define a function before receiving a `NoMethodError`. It's a [Kernel](http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-1.9.3/Kernel.html) method.

    class Thing
      def method_missing(method, * args)
        if method.to_s[0..2] == "to_"
          "i am a #{method.to_s[3..-1]}"
        else
          super
        end
      end
    end

    p Thing.new.to_computer # "i am a computer"
    # p Thing.new.invalid # NoMethodError

In other languages meta-programming is *hard*. In Ruby it's very simple and transparent. As Matz says: *"Have fun, be safe and use your imagination!"*.

Exercise
--------

Implement a model called `Gadget` and a model called `Widget` that implements a callback in pure Ruby. A widget should contain a collection of gadgets. Every time a widget receives a gadget, invoke a `:when_added` callback. Every time a widget becomes empty, invoke a `:when_empty` callback.

