Live Rails MVC Application from Scratch
=======================================

Start with the skeleton built in [a previous lesson](7-rails-basics.md).

* *Gemfile*: gems, including Rails
* *config.ru*: rack-based startup script
* *script/rails*: rails-based startup script
* *config/routes.rb*: drawn routes
* *config/environment.rb*: application initialization
* *config/boot.rb*: application boot
* *config/application.rb*: application
* *config/initializers/secret_token.rb*: base cryptographic blob
* *public/index.html*: hello world

Rakefile
--------

Tasks, such as database migrations, are written in [Rake](https://github.com/jimweirich/rake). Rake needs a `Rakefile`, which imports the application's code. Therefore, you have access to all domain models in Rake tasks.

    require File.expand_path('../config/application', __FILE__)

    require 'rake'

    RailsMVC::Application.load_tasks

You can run `rake -T` to see available tasks.

    $ rake -T
    rake about # List versions of all Rails frameworks and the environment
    ...

Asset Pipeline
--------------

The *asset pipeline* enables authoring javascript, CSS and other static artifacts in many ways and compile or package them for the application. For example, in Rails 3.1 the asset pipeline enabled developers to write CoffeeScript instead of raw JavaScript out of the box.

Enable the application pipeline in `config/application.rb`.

    # Enable the asset pipeline
    config.assets.enabled = true

Dynamic HTML in Rails is rendered with *templates*. Templates can be authored in multiple languages and execute Ruby code. Rails uses *ERB* by default. Another popular and much less terse templating language is *HAML*. Add `haml-rails` to Gemfile and an application layout `app/views/layouts/application.html.haml`. A layout is a top-level template that defines the page structure, includes stylesheets and javascripts.

    !!!
    %html
      %head
        %title
          Rails MVC
        = stylesheet_link_tag "application"
        = javascript_include_tag "application"

      %body
        = yield

Note `stylesheet_link_tag` and `javascript_include_tag` method calls. These come from [ActionView::Helpers::AssetTagHelper](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionView/Helpers/AssetTagHelper.html), which is the tip of the *asset pipeline*. While you can hardcode links in your templates, these functions work with the asset pipeline's concepts and let you add global settings, such as *asset host* for assets hosted externally on a CDN. It's pretty common for Rails applications to generate assets at build time and deploy these to a web server.

The asset pipeline has the concept of a *manifest file* which include *directives* to let rails know which files to include.
`app/assets/javascripts/application.js` is one of these *manifest files* with the following *directives*.

    //= require jquery
    //= require jquery_ujs
    //= require_tree .

Rails now ships with jQuery, which enables data-driven postbacks. `jquery-rails` will already be in your Gemfile as of Rails 3.1.

Add a stylesheet to `app/assets/stylesheets/application.css.scss`. The stylesheet is authored in SASS, which is an extension of CSS that allows you to use variables, nested rules, mixins, inline imports, etc.

    #error_explanation {
      background-color: #f0f0f0;
      h2 {
        background-color: #c00;
        color: #fff; 
      }
      ul li {
        font-size: 12px;
        list-style: square; 
      } 
    }

Database Configuration
----------------------

Rails configuration files are authored in *YAML*, which executes Ruby code. You could, for example, reference an environment variable with `ENV['VARIABLE']`. Add `config/database.yml` for the database configuration. You can reuse blocks of configuration with `<<:`.

    common: &common
      adapter: postgresql
      username: rails
      password: password

    development:
      <<: *common
      database: rails_development

    test:
      <<: *common
      database: rails_test

    production:
      <<: *common
      database: rails_production

If you run `rake -T` you'll notice that there are no database tasks. That's because we're only using the *action_controller* part of Rails. Change `require "action_controller/railtie"` in `config/application.rb` to include `rails/all`.

    require 'rails/all'

Re-run `rake -T` and make sure that database tasks are now displayed.

Database Migrations
-------------------

A database-backed application needs a schema. We could create `db/schema.rb` and populate it with a schema, but the Rails way is to use *database migrations*. Migrations support creating a new database and upgrading an existing one with built-in database versioning.

Create `db/migrate/1_create_things.rb`.

    class CreateThings < ActiveRecord::Migration
      def change
        create_table :things do |t|
          t.string :name
          t.timestamps
        end
      end
    end

We  forgot the description. Let's create another migration to add this.

    $ rails generate migration add_description_to_things description:string

      invoke  active_record
      create    db/migrate/20111207001110_add_description_to_things.rb

This should generate the following time-stamped migration file:

    class AddDescriptionToThings < ActiveRecord::Migration
      def change
        add_column :things, :description, :string
      end
    end

Migrations run incrementally in the order they were created, as determined by the number in the front of their filename.

Gemfile
-------

Add a PostgreSQL driver in `Gemfile`.

    gem "pg"

Local Database
--------------

Create a database and migrate it from empty to version 1.

    rake db:create
    rake db:migrate

Data Model
----------

In Rails, ActiveRecord abstracts the database implementation completely.

Create `app/models/thing.rb`.

    class Thing < ActiveRecord::Base
      validates_presence_of :name
      validates_uniqueness_of :name
    end

The validators are a way to ensure presence and uniqueness of fields. The fields are automagically generated by querying the schema on application startup.

Application Controller
----------------------

All controllers inherit from `ActionController::Base`. It's a good idea to create an `ApplicationController` that can implement common logic, such as authentication, in the future.

    class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
    end

Things Controller
-----------------

    class ThingsController < ApplicationController
    end

Retrieving all things for the index page.

    def index
      @things = Thing.all
    end

Retrieve an existing thing by parameter when showing or editing a thing. The `params` hash has entries that can be accessed both by string and by symbol.

    def show
      @thing = Thing.find(params[:id])
    end

    def show
      @thing = Thing.find(params[:id])
    end

Create a new thing when clicking on new.

    def new
      @thing = Thing.new
    end

Persist a new or update an existing thing when submitting a thing from a new or edit page.

    def create
      @thing = Thing.new(params[:thing])
      if @thing.save
        redirect_to @thing, notice: 'Thing was successfully created.'
      else
        render action: "new"
      end
    end

    def update
      @thing = Thing.find(params[:id])
      if @thing.update_attributes(params[:thing])
        redirect_to @thing, notice: 'Thing was successfully updated.'
      else
        render action: "edit"
      end
    end

Errors are stored automatically via the model being saved, the controller's job is to re-render the view corresponding to the failed action. Create a partial `views/shared/_error_msg.html.haml` that will display errors.

    - if model.errors.any?
      .error_explanation
        %h3= "#{pluralize(model.errors.count, "error")} saving #{model.class}:"
        %ul
          - model.errors.full_messages.each do |msg|
            %li= msg

Things View
-----------

Add `app/views/things/index.html.haml`.

    %h1 Things

    %table
      %tr
        %th= "Name"
        %th

      - @things.each do |thing|
        = thing.name

Rather than hardcoding an entire form, lets use `simple_form` and make an edit form partial.

    = simple_form_for @thing do |f|
      = render 'shared/error_msg', model: @thing
      = f.input :name
      = f.button :submit

The form can be used for the new thing in `app/views/things/new.html.haml`.

    %h1 New Thing

    = render 'form'

    = link_to 'Back', things_path

It can also be used to edit a thing in `app/views/things/edit.html.haml`.

    %h1= @thing.name

    = render 'form'

    = link_to 'Back', things_path

Finally, we should display a thing in `app/views/things/show.html.haml`.

    %ul
      %li= "Name: #{@thing.name}"

    = link_to 'Edit', edit_thing_path(@thing)
    |
    = link_to 'Back', things_path

Things Routes
-------------

Edit `config/routes.rb`.

    RailsMVC::Application.routes.draw do
      resources :things
    end

Review `rake routes`.

