Basic Active Record
===================

ActiveRecord is the default Rails' Object Relational Mapper (ORM) and is the core of *Model Driven Design*. It encourages *fat* models and *skinny* controllers.

* Wraps a row of data
* Encapsulates database access
* Adds domain logic

It's important to note that, unlike Hibernate or JPA, ActiveRecord is a leaky abstraction, it just makes SQL things easier. But understanding the underlying complexity, the SQL underneath, is recommended.

Basics
------

A database table is a Ruby class.

``` ruby
class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
  # class implementation
end
```

Table names are plural and class names are singular. The table underneath the `Widget` class is `widgets`.

Attributes are inferred from *db/schema.rb*.

``` ruby
create_table "widgets", :force => true do |t|
  t.string   "name"
  t.datetime "created_at"
  t.datetime "updated_at"
end
```

If `Widget` has a `name`, the class `Widget` automatically gets a `name` field.

``` ruby
Widget.new.name
```

All tables have an Integer ID. The *widgets* table has a serial *id* field. This is not explicitly shown in the schema file but is automatically appended for every model.

``` ruby
Widget.new.id # id will be null because the database hasn't set the id yet.

Widget.create.id # id will be set upon successful creation.
```

Deployment and upgrade is taken care of with *migrations*.

Saving Objects
--------------

* `save` and `save!`
* `update_attributes` and `update_attributes!`

As shown here:

``` ruby
widget = Widget.new
widget.save # attempts to save the widget, returns true or false
widget.errors # contains errors from save, if any
widget.save! # raises an exception instead
```

Querying
--------

* `Widget.find(:first)`
* `Widget.find(:all)` or `Widget.all`
* `Widget.find(1)`

Finders by field value are implemented using `method_missing`, eg. `find_by_name`.

A leaky and lightweight SQL abstraction is provided.

``` ruby
Widget.find(:all,
  conditions: [ "username = ? and password = ?", username, password ],
  limit: 10,
  offset :10,
  order: 'username',
  joins: 'accounts')
```

The following can also be invoked by chaining the methods:

``` ruby
Widget.where("username = ? and password = ?", username, password).limit(10).offset(10).order('username').joins(:accounts)
```

It's also possible to use `:select`, `:group` and `:include` (eager loading).

Validators
----------

Validations are performed on callbacks via `validate`, `validate_on_create` or `validate_on_update` as well as through built-in `validates_presence_of`, `validates_uniqueness_of`, `validates_numericallity_of`, `validates_length_of`, etc.

``` ruby
class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
  validates :name, :presence => true, :length => { :minimum => 3 }
end

widget = Widget.create
widget.errors # => {:name => ["can't be blank", "is too short (minimum is 3 characters)"]}
```

Associations
------------

* `belongs_to`
* `has_one`
* `has_many`
* `has_and_belongs_to_many` (HABTM)

Associations add methods to the class using *joins* at the SQL level. eg. `widget.gadgets`.

``` ruby
class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
  has_many :gadgets
end

class Gadget < ActiveRecord::Base
  belongs_to :widget
end

widget = Widget.create!({ :name => "test" })
widget.gadgets << Gadget.create!
```

If you run the above, you will be hit with an exception:

    SQLException: no such column: gadgets.widget_id

In order for the association to be made, a foreign key must be added to the table which `belongs_to` the containing model. In this case, `gadget`:

    $ rails g migration add_widget_id_to_gadgets widget_id:integer

Adds the *gadgets* table to *db/schema.rb*.

``` ruby
create_table "gadgets", :force => true do |t|
  t.integer  "widget_id" # rails will automatically use this column to associate a gadget with a widget.
  t.datetime "created_at"
  t.datetime "updated_at"
end
```

Notice the [convention over configuration](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_over_configuration) approach to the foreign key name `widget_id`. Rails assumes the foreign key is the attribute labeled with the model name, `widget`, suffixed with `_id`. It also infers the table name from the symbol `:widgets`. 

Explicitly setting these values is shown below:

``` ruby
class Gadget < ActiveRecord::Base
  belongs_to :widget, class_name: "Widget", foreign_key: "widget_id"
end
```

Associations :through => gadgets
--------------------------------

There will be scenarios where you will want a collection on a model that needs its join explicitly set because it does not have a direct association. The `:through` attribute allows you to define the join table on an association.

``` ruby
class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
  has_many :gadgets
  has_many :controls, through: gadgets
end
```

The `:through` key allows the Widget model to have a collection of all controls by getting them from its `gadgets`.

`has_many` and `:through` ultimately allow many-to-many associations.

Association `has_and_belongs_to_many` (HABTM)
---------------------------------

`has_and_belongs_to_many` (HABTM) allows many-to-many associations through an implied join table that doesn't have a separate entity. The `:through` join table is essentially hidden. We will not be talking about `has_and_belongs_many` more at this time.

Testing with `Shoulda`
======================

[`shoulda`](https://github.com/thoughtbot/shoulda) is a gem that makes it easy to test out the validations and associations of your models.

Testing Validations
-------------------

Writing custom validation tests can be verbose, especially when requiring validations tests for multiple fields.

Naive custom implementation:

``` ruby
it "should validate the presence of type" do
  expect {
    Gadget.create!
  }.to raise_error

  expect {
    Gadget.create(type: Gadget::TYPES.sample)
  }.to change { Gadget.count }.by(1)
end
```

With `shoulda`:

``` ruby
it { should validate_presence_of :type }
```

Their suite of matchers make it easy to test validations in a readable fashion.

Testing Associations
--------------------

The same goes for associations:

``` ruby
it { should belong_to :widget }
```

Putting this all together allows one to create readable and complete specs:

``` ruby
describe Widget do
  describe "associations" do
    it { should belong_to(:displayable) }
    it { should have_many :gadgets }
    it { should have_many(:controls).through(:gadgets) }
  end

  describe "validations" do
    it { should validate_presence_of :type }
  end
end
```

Using the Object Factory Fabricator for Testing
-----------------------------------------------

Often when working with request specs or integration tests, fake data is needed to set up your test scenario.
The gem [fabricator](http://fabricationgem.org/) or [factory_girl](https://github.com/thoughtbot/factory_girl) makes creating this fake data, and their associations, extremely straightforward.

Defining a Fabricator:

``` ruby
Fabricator(:person) do
  name 'Greg Graffin'
  profession 'Professor/Musician'
end
```

Using the fabricator to create an instance of `person` and place it in your database:

``` ruby
Fabricate(:person)
```

This allows one to create request specs or integration tests that run against an expected set of data:

``` ruby
describe 'home page' do
  before { 3.times { Fabricate(:person) } }
  it "should display people" do
     ...
  end
end
```

These object factories go a step further an allow one to set up associations such that all dependent associations are made to create that particular object:

``` ruby
Fabricator(:office) do
  person
  office_number { sequence(:office_number) { |n| n } }
end
```

Here `person` will automatically be associated with the `person` fabricator defined above. It is equivalent to writing:

``` ruby
person { Fabricate(:person) }
```

The `sequence` keyword will guarantee a unique number is generated, in sequence, for the attribute `office_number`.

Summary
-------

Test driving with [shoulda](https://github.com/thoughtbot/shoulda) at the model level and [fabricator](http://fabricationgem.org/) at the request level speed up productivity and maintainability over the long haul.

Exercises
---------

Create two associated models `employee` and `role` using shoulda matchers for test driving and fabricators for object creation. Ensure that `role` has a one-to-many relationship to `employee`.

The boilerplate application with assignment details can be found [here](https://github.com/generalassembly/ga-ruby-on-rails-for-devs/tree/master/class/7.1-active-record-basics-exercises)
