Live Rails MVC Application and Scaffold
=======================================

Rails can generate a working rails application in a single command.

    $ rails new rails-basics

Model View Controller
---------------------

An HTTP request is sent to a *controller* via a route defined in `config/routes.rb`. A controller is a class that inherits 
from `ApplicationController`, which inherits from `ActionController::Base`. It will typically render a corresponding *view*,
which is a template in ERB, HAML or other format that gets converted to HTML. These templates often use a specific *layout*.
The view is often populated with data from a *model* that is usually retrieved from a database. 

An Integration Test
-------------------

Create a new test fixture.

    rails generate integration_test index

This creates a test in `test/integration/index_test.rb`. We can add some meat to it, checking that we can render the index.html page with a proper title.

``` ruby
require 'test_helper'

class IndexTest < ActionDispatch::IntegrationTest
  fixtures :all

  test "fetches the index.html page" do
    get "/"
    assert_response :success
    assert_select "title", "Ruby on Rails: Welcome aboard"
  end

end
```

Asserts come from [ActionDispatch::Assertions](http://apidock.com/rails/ActionDispatch/Assertions).

Run tests with `rake test`.

Switch from SQL-Lite to PostgreSQL
----------------------------------

Heroku doesn't support SQLLite. Lets switch to PostgreSQL.

Change `sqlite` to `pg` in `Gemfile` and run `bundle install`.

Create a login role.

    $ psql template1  

    create role rails with createdb login password 'password';

Edit `config/database.yml`.

``` yaml
common: &common
  adapter: postgresql
  username: rails
  password: password

development:
  <<: *common
  database: rails_development

test:
  <<: *common
  database: rails_test

production:
  <<: *common
  database: rails_production
```

Create the databases.

    rake db:create:all

See your created databases with the PostgreSQL commandline:

    $ psql rails_development
    psql (9.1.2)
    Type "help" for help.

    rails_development=# \l # list databases
    rails_development | <owner> | UTF8     | en_US.UTF-8 | en_US.UTF-8 |
    rails_production  | <owner> | UTF8     | en_US.UTF-8 | en_US.UTF-8 |
    rails_test        | <owner> | UTF8     | en_US.UTF-8 | en_US.UTF-8 |

    rails_development=# \q  # quit

Rakefile
--------

Tasks are written in Ruby and run with [Rake](https://github.com/jimweirich/rake). Rake needs a `Rakefile`, which imports the application's code. You can run `rake -T` to see available tasks.

    $ rake -T
    rake about # List versions of all Rails frameworks and the environment
    ...

Creating a Rake Task
--------------------

Following the Rails convention, custom tasks are found inside the *lib/tasks/* folder.

Create a file called *lib/tasks/hello_world.rake* with the following contents:

``` ruby
desc "Tell the World Hello"
task :hello_world do
  puts "Hello World."
end
```

Rerun `rake -T` to see your new task:

    $ rake -T
    ...
    rake hello_world         # Tell the World Hello

The *lib/tasks/* folder in your application is empty because gem-specific tasks are included in their respective gem folders.

Scaffold Domain Model
---------------------

    rails generate scaffold Thing name:string description:string

This creates a model, controller, views, a database migration script, updates the schema and writes basic tests.

Let's run the migration:

    $ rake db:migrate

Now let's start our rails server:

    $ rails server

We can now navigate to `http://localhost:3000/things` and see our new scaffold at work.

Assets
------

In Rails assets are precompiled. As of Rails 3.1.1 and the Heroku Cedar stack, this is done automatically on deployment.

Here are the manual steps for asset precompilation on Rails:

    $ RAILS_ENV=production rake assets:precompile
    $ git add public/assets
    $ git commit -m "vendor compiled assets"

Deploy to Heroku
----------------

Heroku provides hosting for Rails applications and GIT-based workflow for deployment. Create an account on [heroku.com](http://www.heroku.com/).

    gem install heroku
    heroku keys:add

Create an application.

    $ heroku create dblock-rails-mvc --stack cedar
    Creating dblock-rails-mvc... done, stack is cedar
    http://dblock-rails-mvc.herokuapp.com | git@heroku.com:dblock-rails-mvc.git

*Heroku* sets up a GIT remote repository for you. This is a GIT-based destination to which we can *push* code. You can see your remotes with `git remote -v`.
To manually add this remote repository, enter the follow command:

    $ git remote add heroku git@heroku.com:dblock-rails-mvc.git

Push the application to Heroku.

    $ git push heroku master

Open a browser, `heroku open`, and view both your default rails page and your `things`.

Upon navigating to the `things` page, the web application will error out. This is because we must run our migrations on heroku:

    $ heroku run rake db:migrate

Now we can view our `things` page in all its glory.

Let's run our custom rake task `rake hello_world` on Heroku:

    $ heroku run rake hello_world
    Running rake hello_world attached to terminal... up, run.1
    Hello World

Exercise
--------

Create a Rake task in `lib/tasks` that loads the `database.yaml` file and displays the database configuration for the current environment. When running this task, check whether the `database` value is set - you may need to set `YAML::ENGINE.yamler = 'syck'`.

Next
====

Lets rebuild a [Rails MVC application from scratch](4.3-rails-mvc-dev.md).

