Introduction to Git
===================

Objective
---------

Learn the basics of Git and understand what role Github plays in the ecosystem of Ruby and Ruby-on-Rails. Learn concepts, such as *snapshot*, *repository*, *pull*, *push* and *topical branches*.

Git
---

Git is a fast, open source, distributed version control system. It's unlike CVS, SourceSafe, ClearCase, Subversion or Perforce, and is somewhat like Mercurial (Hg). Distributed means it works offline. Git is an essential enabler of the ecosystem of Ruby and Ruby-on-Rails.

Git Snapshots
-------------

A git commit is a snapshot of all files and meta information at a given point in time, not a file diff.

A New Git Repository
--------------------

Create a GIT repostory offline. We'll call this one *red*.

    $ mkdir ga
    $ cd ga
    ga$ mkdir red
    ga$ cd red

    ga/red$ git init
    Initialized empty Git repository in /home/dblock/sourcega/red/.git/

    ga/red$ touch README.md

    ga/red$ git add README.md

    ga/red$ git status

    # On branch master
    #
    # Initial commit
    #
    # Changes to be committed:
    #   (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)
    #
    #	new file:   README.md
    #

    ga/red$ git commit -m "Added README."
    [master (root-commit) 3923738] Added README.
     0 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
     create mode 100644 README.md

    ga/red$ 

Exercise
--------

Modify the contents of *README.md* in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax) format and commit the changes.

Our Local Repository
---------------------------

Our previous commit placed our changes into our *local* repository, a concept unique to distributed version control systems like Git and Hg.

Examine the history of this *local* repository.

    ga/red$ git log

    commit 392373835e0f7702251d45a088664918e9125c97
    Author: dblock
    Date:   Mon Dec 5 09:34:08 2011 -0500

    Added README.

Pushing to a Remote Repository: Github
-----------------

[Create a new repository on Github](https://github.com/repositories/new) called *red*. That's an empty repository with no files. Github ran the same git commands as we just did on their servers.

We can connect our local *red* repository with Github's by adding a remote location called *origin*. This name is just a convention.

    ga/red$ git remote add origin git@github.com:<username>/red.git

One can now see the remote branch listed:

    ga/red$ git remote
    origin

Push all our changes to Github.

    ga/red$ git push -u origin master

Next time you can push all pending changes on all branches.

    ga/red$ git push

The opposite of *pushing* is *pulling*. The following updates the local copy to the remote changes on the *master* branch.

    ga/red$ git pull origin master 

Cloning
-------

Use `git clone` to get a copy of an existing Github repository to your local machine.

    ga$ git clone git@github.com:<username>/red.git green

This creates a new folder called *green* with the contents of the *red* repository, a *local* repository from the *remote* repository on github.

Topic Branches
----------------

Unlike other source controls, branches are cheap. In Git it's considered a good practice to never work on the *master* branch and create *topic branches* instead. A topic branch is created off master.

First, list your branches. You will see that you are on the *master* branch.

    ga/red$ git branch

Ensure the *master* branch is up-to-date.

    ga/red$ git pull origin master 

Create a new branch *readme-changes*.

    ga/red$ git checkout -b readme-changes
    Switched to a new branch 'readme-changes'

    ga/red$ git status
    # On branch readme-changes
    nothing to commit (working directory clean)

Make some changes on the branch, commit them and push them to Github.

    ga/red$ git push origin readme-changes

When the feature on a branch is ready, merge it to *master*.

    ga/red$ git checkout master
    ga/red$ git merge readme-changes

Visualize the Branches
-------------------

Commits add to the log inside Git, allowing one to visualize the changes to each particular branch.

    ga/red$ git log --graph

Use the built-in GUI GitK to see this graph

    ga/red$ gitk

Exercise
--------

Make a change to README in your local *red* repository in a new branch, *push* it to Github and *pull* the branch into your local *green* copy.

Forking
-------

To contribute to someone else's work, create a new *fork* via Github, then clone your fork to your local environment. To submit changes, make *pull requests*.

To pull changes made to the original work, one would need to set up an `upstream` remote repository.

    ga/red$ git remote add upstream git@github.com:<original_author>/<upstream_source>.git

    ga/red$ git remote
    origin
    upstream

To pull any changes made to upstream one would run the following command:

    ga/red$ git pull upstream master

Exercise
--------

In pairs, fork each-other's repositories, clone your fork, make a change to *README.md* and create a pull request. Examine the difference on Github and merge the pull request. Extra points for creating a topic branch.

