Complete Active Record
======================

ActiveRecord is the default Rails' Object Relational Mapper (ORM) and is the core of *Model Driven Design*. It encourages *fat* models and *skinny* controllers.

* Wraps a row of data
* Encapsulates database access
* Adds domain logic

It's important to note that, unlike Hibernate or JPA, ActiveRecord is a leaky abstraction, it just makes SQL things easier. But understanding the underlying complexity, the SQL underneath, is recommended.

Basics
------

A database table is a Ruby class.

    class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
      # class implementation
    end

Table names are plural and class names are singular. The table underneath the *Widget* class is *widgets*.

Attributes are inferred from `schema.rb`

    create_table "widgets", :force => true do |t|
      t.string   "name"
      t.datetime "created_at"
      t.datetime "updated_at"
    end

If *Widget* has a *name*, the class *Widget* automatically gets a *name* field.

    Widget.new.name

All tables have an Integer ID. The *widgets* table has a serial *id* field. This is not explicitly shown in the schema file but is automatically appended for every model.

    Widget.new.id # id will be null because the database hasn't set the id yet.

    Widget.create.id # id will be set upon successful creation.

Deployment and upgrade is taken care of with *migrations*.

Saving Objects
--------------

* `save` and `save!`
* `update_attributes` and `update_attributes!`

As shown here:

    widget = Widget.new
    widget.save # attempts to save the widget, returns true or false
    widget.errors # contains errors from save, if any
    widget.save! # raises an exception instead

Querying
--------

* `Widget.find(:first)`
* `Widget.find(:all)` or `Widget.all`
* `Widget.find(1)`

Finders by field value are implemented using `method_missing`, eg. `find_by_name`.

A leaky and lightweight SQL abstraction is provided.

    Widget.find(:all,
      conditions: [ "username = ? and password = ?", username, password ],
      limit: 10,
      offset :10,
      order: 'username',
      joins: 'accounts on user.account_id = accounts.id')

The following can also be invoked by chaining the methods:

    Widget.where("username = ? and password = ?", username, password).limit(10).offset(10).order('username').joins(:accounts)

It's also possible to use `:select`, `:group` and `:include` (eager loading).

Validators
----------

Validations are performed on callbacks via `validate`, `validate_on_create` or `validate_on_update` as well as through built-in `validates_presence_of`, `validates_uniqueness_of`, `validates_numericallity_of`, `validates_length_of`, etc.

    class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
      validates :name, :presence => true, :length => { :minimum => 3 }
    end

    widget = Widget.create
    widget.errors # => {:name => ["can't be blank", "is too short (minimum is 3 characters)"]}

Associations
------------

* `belongs_to`
* `has_one`
* `has_many`
* `has_and_belongs_to_many` (HABTM)

Associations add methods to the class using `joins` at the SQL level. eg. `widget.gadgets`.

    class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_many :gadgets
    end

    class Gadget < ActiveRecord::Base
      belongs_to :widget
    end

    widget = Widget.create!({ :name => "test" })
    widget.gadgets << Gadget.create!

If you run the above, you will be hit with an exception:

    SQLException: no such column: gadgets.widget_id

In order for the association to be made, a foreign key must be added to the table which `belongs_to` the containing model. In this case, `gadget`:

    $ rails g migration add_widget_id_to_gadgets widget_id:integer

`schema.rb`

    create_table "gadgets", :force => true do |t|
      t.integer  "widget_id" # rails will automatically use this column to associate a gadget with a widget.
      t.datetime "created_at"
      t.datetime "updated_at"
    end

Notice the [convention over configuration](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_over_configuration) approach to the foreign key name `widget_id`. Rails assumes the foreign key is the attribute labelled with the model name, `widget`, suffixed with `_id`. It also infers the table name from the symbol `:widgets`. 

Explicitly setting these values is shown below:

    class Gadget < ActiveRecord::Base
      belongs_to :widget, class_name: "Widget", foreign_key: "widget_id"
    end

Associations :through => gadgets
--------------------------------

There will be scenarios where you will want a collection on a model that needs its join explicitly set because it does not have a direct association. The `:through` attribute allows you to define the join table on an association.

    class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_many :gadgets
      has_many :controls, through: gadgets
    end

The `:through` key allows the Widget model to have a collection of all controls by getting them from its `gadgets`.

`has_many` and `:through` ultimately allow many-to-many associations.

Association `has_and_belongs_to_many` (HABTM)
---------------------------------

`has_and_belongs_to_many` (HABTM) allows many-to-many associations through an implied join table that doesn't have a separate entity. The `:through` join table is essentially hidden. We will not be talking about `has_and_belongs_many` more at this time.

Callbacks and Observers
-----------------------

Built-in callbacks, such as `before_validation`, allow participating in the object's lifecycle. Callbacks are instance methods.

    class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
      after_save :saved

      def saved
        Rails.logger.log "created Widget with id=#{id} and name=#{name}"
      end

      before_create do |widget|
        widget.name = widget.name.capitalize
      end
    end

You can also create observers that derive from `ActiveRecord::Observer` that `observe Model` and implement callbacks, such as `after_create`.

    class WidgetObserver < ActiveRecord::Observer
      def after_save(model)
        Rails.logger.log "created Widget with id=#{model.id} and name=#{model.name}"
      end
    end

You must register your observers in the application's `config/application.rb`

    config.active_record.observers = :widget_observer

Transactions
------------

    Model.transaction do
       # wraps commands within a transaction
    end

Single Table Inheritance
------------------------

Rails allows one to have multiple classes based off of a single table, using the type column to determine the class.

    $ rails g migration add_type_to_gadgets type:string

`schema.rb`:

    create_table "gadgets" do |t|
      t.string   "type"  # type defines the class this row belongs to (HeaderGadget, SidebarGadget, etc)
      t.string   "name"
      t.datetime "created_at"
      t.datetime "updated_at"
    end

Based on the string in the type column, one of the following classes would get instantiated.

    class Gadget; end;

    class MusicGadget
      def playlist
        # retrieves music playlist
      end
    end

    class SidebarGadget
      def dock
        # docks the gadget to a particular bar
      end
    end

This allows one to vary functionality based on a type, but still have common persistence.

Again, [convention over configuration](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_over_configuration) is being practiced here, with the `type` column being reserved for STI. You should rarely if ever override the `type` column for something other than STI.

Polymorphic Associations
------------------------

Polymorphic relationships are created between objects that belong to multiple models.

    class WebPage < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_many :widgets, as: :displayable
    end

    class Desktop < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_many :widgets, as: :displayable
    end

    class Widget < ActiveRecord::Base
      belongs_to :displayable, polymorphic: true
    end

To enable this scenario, the polymorphic interface `widget` must define both a foreign key column and a type column.

    create_table "widgets", :force => true do |t|
      t.string   "name"
      t.datetime "created_at"
      t.datetime "updated_at"
      t.integer "displayable_id"
      t.string "displayable_type"
    end

Exercise
--------

- Create a polymorphic association where two models `instructor` and `scout` both have `badges`.
- Create a single table inheritance heirarchy with the model `Animal` with the types `Fish` and `Bird`. Give them the methods `swim` and `fly` for the appropriate class.
